
Here we examine the effects of water and nutrient addition on biomass gain and 
leaf trait of eight species from the tropical dry forest of Costa Rica. We used 
three fixers and five non fixers species. We hypothesized that water and/or 
nutrient addition will cause that plants shift their leaf traits in order to 
uptake the new resourses available, which will lead to a biomass gain. (ref) 

We addressed the following questions: 

(Q1) How biomass and leaf traits shift with the addition of water and nutrients? 

(Q2) Does the shift in leaf traits correlate with plant biomass the gain?    

For (Q1) we predict.... 


(Q1) How biomass and leaf traits shift with the addition of water and nutrients?  
Total Biomass

For the fixers species,plant total biomass increased significantly to the 
addition of water, nutrients and both (F and p-values). The addition of water 
increased 29% the total biomass compared to the ambient treatment. While the 
addition of nutrients increased the total biomass 63% and the addition of both, 
water and nutrients, increased the total biomass in 70% compared to the 
ambient rain treatment.

For non-fixers species, only the nutrients and the nutrients plus water 
treatments increased significantly the total biomass. In the case of the 
nutrients treatment, this treatment increased 39% the total biomass while 
the addition of both increased 41%. The addition of water had no significant 
effect on the total biomass. 

+ Biomass partition: Above and belowground biomass 

Aboveground biomass for fixers increased significantly when nutrients and 
nutrients plus water were added compared to the ambient rain treatment. 
Aboveground biomass increased 46% when nutrients were added and 80% when 
nutrients plus water were added. For non-fixers, aboveground biomass only 
increased significantly compared to the ambient rain in the nutrients plus 
water treatment. We found that belowground for fixers and non-fixers did not 
responded to the addition of water and/or nutrients (Fig). 

+ Biomass partition: root, stem and leaf biomass 

Fixer’s root mass responded significantly to all treatments. Nutrient addition 
increased root mass 78% compared to the ambient rain treatment while water 
increased 37% and nutrients plus water increased it 58%. For non fixers, only 
the addition of nutrients increased significantly root biomass in 47%.

Stem mass for fixers increased significantly 13% in the plus nutrients 
treatment and 34% in the nutrients plus water treatment. Non fixer’s stem mass 
did not change significantly in any of the treatments. 

Leaf mass increased significantly for fixers and non-fixers in the nutrient and 
nutrients plus water treatments when compared to the ambient rain treatment. 
For fixers, the addition of nutrients increased 40% and the addition of 
nutrients plus water increased 73%. For non-fixers the addition of nutrients 
increased 43%  whilst the addition of water and nutrients increased it 50%. 

Biomass partition: root, stem and leaf mass fractions Supplementary??? 

